If we stop and think about this
scripture text for today,
it was taken from an article
that dealt with how to help couples
who are perhaps having difficulties
in their marriage to resolve them
and to move forward.
We contrast that with the world.
You know, in the world,
when they get married,
they anticipate they’re going
to have problems and conflicts,
and they’ve already mapped a route
for leaving the marriage if things are
too inconvenient for them
or are just not working for them.
And that’s really because they don’t know
our God, Jehovah, do they?
They don’t know how he feels
and the depth of his feelings.
When we stop and consider marriage
and the institution of marriage
that he inaugurated back
in the garden of Eden,
we see a great contrast.
He did not want marriage
just to be a contractual agreement,
something for convenience
or personal interest
or even just for procreation purposes.
He didn’t want it to be a heavy burden.
For instance, at Genesis 2:24
when Jehovah did perform the first marriage,
he didn’t say: ‘That is why a man
will leave his father and mother,
and they will be stuck with each other
for the rest of their lives,’
as if committing them
to a life sentence or punishment.
No.
But when we read Jehovah’s words
in this scripture,
we hear in Jehovah
a great deal of affection
and even sentiment about the couple,
Adam and Eve,
when he says: “That is why a man
will leave his father and mother
“and he will stick to his wife,
and they will become one flesh.”
You see, from this we learn about Jehovah
—truly, love being his dominant quality
and how he conveyed that dominant quality
to his earthly creation,
humans made in his image.
Adam and Eve had the capacity, then,
of developing such a love
for one another
that they would literally cling
to one another
—hold on to one another.
And this is an important aspect of marriage,
especially as imperfect people
living in “the time of the end”:
We have to cling to one another
in order to get through
the ‘tribulation of the flesh’
and other difficulties
that come upon married people today.
So we see, though, in analyzing this
that we get to know our God, Jehovah,
and the deep love that he himself has
and conveys to his people.
Jehovah is the superlative example
of a man,
if you will—a person—
who clung to his wife.
And why do we say that?
Consider how he viewed ancient Israel.
Open your Bibles, please,
to the book of Isaiah
chapter 54 and verse 5.
Here we read: “For your Grand Maker
“is as your husband,
Jehovah of armies is his name.”
Now, true, we think
of the covenant that Jehovah initiated
with his ancient people, Israel.
They were bound together
in a covenant agreement.
But what was behind it?
It was love.
Jehovah made that clear to his people
when this contract
—this covenant—was inaugurated.
At Deuteronomy 7:7, 8,
notice what Jehovah through Moses said.
It says: “It was not because you were
the most numerous of all the peoples
“that Jehovah showed affection
“for you and chose you,
“for you were the smallest
of all the peoples.
“Rather, it was because
of Jehovah’s love for you
and because he kept the oath
that he had sworn to your forefathers.”
Love was behind this.
Love is what motivated Jehovah
to make a covenant with Abraham
and pass that on to Isaac, to Jacob,
and to other faithful men,
like David later on.
It was love that moved him
to engage in this covenant.
He found someone that was
of the same mind and heart as him
who he could use to work out
his purpose on behalf of mankind.
Jehovah gave them his very best.
He clung to them and looked after them.
And how deeply it pained him
when his covenant people
—wife, if you will—
turned unfaithful to him and rejected him!
Jehovah’s feelings are pure and deep.
So Jehovah felt truly betrayed
and deeply cut to the heart.
Now, he really wanted to make this clear
to his people,
especially the ten-tribe kingdom
who were so spiritually bankrupt
that they lost total sense
of what Jehovah was all about.
So before he pronounced judgment upon them,
he made very clear to them just how he felt
about them and what they had done to him.
And how did he do that?
He commissioned his prophet Hosea
with a very difficult assignment.
Turn with me, please, to the book of Hosea
in chapter 1,
and notice right away what Hosea was to do
—chapter 1 and verse 2.
It says: “When Jehovah started
to speak his word through Hosea,
“Jehovah said to Hosea:
“‘Go, marry a woman of prostitution
“‘and have children of prostitution,
“‘because by prostitution the land
has turned completely away
from following Jehovah.’”
Can you imagine getting that assignment?
Here you are a virgin
—never been married before—
and you’re told now to go marry someone
that you know
is going to be unfaithful to you.
And Jehovah did that.
He wanted to show in a very real way
to this hardhearted people
just what his feelings were and what
he was going through in dealing with them.
This was a drama, not of actors,
but of real-life people.
We can just imagine those in the village
of Hosea and what they were thinking.
Here is this prophet of God,
and here this woman was just cheating on him
and treating him very, very badly.
Anybody with any kind of spiritual sense
would have been cut to the heart.
Jehovah reached out to those
who were cut to the heart
because he said,
‘This land is going to be destroyed;
you’re going to be exiles,
but I’m going to call you back.’
And Hosea 3:1 says:
“Then Jehovah said to me:
‘Go once again, love the woman
“‘who is loved by another man
and is committing adultery,
“‘just as Jehovah loves the people of Israel
while they turn to other gods
and love raisin cakes.’”
Jehovah loved them.
And those that loved him,
after exile, returned
and went back to Jerusalem
to continue worshipping God there.
Certainly, when we consider
the history of Israel,
we feel, or know, that Jehovah definitely had
a legal right to just do away with them.
But he didn’t.
Why?
Because there were things to be considered.
There was a great deal
riding on this relationship.
He was working out his purpose
on behalf of mankind.
The Messiah was going to come
through this nation.
So despite all the immorality
that the people of Israel committed
by going to the nations
and worshipping Baals and whatnot
—all this unfaithfulness—Jehovah said,
‘I’m going to take her back
and continue working with her.’
However, there was a limit to this.
And when Jesus came to the earth,
we know that Jehovah
had reached his limit with his people,
especially when they put
his only-begotten Son to death.
And we can see the remorse
and the pain of heart
that Jehovah had
was perfectly reflected in Jesus.
At Luke 19:41, 42,
here it says:
“When [Jesus, that is, when] he got nearby
“[that is, to Jerusalem], he viewed the city
“and wept over it, saying:
“‘If you, even you,
“‘had discerned on this day
the things having to do with peace
—but now they have been hidden
from your eyes.’”
It was too late—too far gone.
The relationship—the marriage—
was going to come to an end,
and it hurt deeply.
You see, in understanding
the marriage relationship
and how Jehovah uses
this relationship in a very real way,
we can understand Jehovah better.
We get to know how deeply he feels
about mankind,
how he treasures mankind,
and also how he treasures his purpose
in wanting to help people.
He feels for those who
are going through ‘tribulation in the flesh,’
and he especially feels deeply
for those whose mates have proven unfaithful.
Jehovah knows completely the emotions
—the gamut of emotions—
that such ones go through.
And he is there to help them
work through this
in making appropriate decisions
that are good for them.
Oftentimes, with such ones,
we see how Jehovah has blessed them
with new assignments and, yes,
even a new mate that loves Jehovah.
And they’re off faithfully serving
their God together,
easing their pain.
So by imitating God’s love
—cultivating God’s love—
in our marriages and understanding marriage,
we understand Jehovah better.
He does not want any of us
to view marriage or any assignment
as something that is a life sentence,
a drudgery, or a burden.
No, but through love,
we are able to cultivate our marriages
and have a life
—whatever situation we are in—
that would truly bring us joy and happiness.